---
layout:     post
title:      "Using python generators"
date:       2022-09-10
tags:       software python
---

## What are generators

Generators are a type of function or expression in Python that enable you
to provide an iterator. A great example of a generator function is the `range`
function used frequently in `for` loops. Iterators generated by generators are
lazy, which means that they are not evaluated until you access the next element,
making them memory efficient. The iterator will yield one value at a time
until the next function is called.

## Basic generator syntax

Let's make a generator for the Fibonacci sequence. If you are not familiar, the
Fibonacci sequence is defined as F0 = 0, F1 = 1, Fn = Fn-1 + Fn-2.

{% highlight python %}
def fibonacci_sequence():
  fn_s2, fn_s1 = 0, 1
  while True:
    yield fn_s2
    fn_s2, fn_s1 = fn_s1, fn_s2 + fn_s1
{% endhighlight %}

Calling the function will return a generator object instead of a final result when there is
a yield within the function.

```
>>> fib = fibonacci_sequence()
>>> type(fib)
<class 'generator'>
```

The `yield` keyword yields the next element of the sequence whenever `next`
is invoked on the generator.

When fetching the first 7 elements of the series, the function would return: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8

```
>>> [next(fib) for _ in range(7)]
[0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8]
```

## Execution mechanics

While this syntax makes it easy to write iterators, which part of the function
is actually lazy? I wanted to test this theory out by using the following
version of the Fibonacci function.

{% highlight python %}
def fibonacci_sequence():
  num = 0
  fn_s2, fn_s1 = 0, 1
  print("Pre Loop")
  while True:
    num = num + 1
    print(f"Before Yield: {num}")
    yield fn_s2
    print(f"After Yield: {num}")
    fn_s2, fn_s1 = fn_s1, fn_s2 + fn_s1
{% endhighlight %}

The prints show which part of the function is evaluated when. It seems like
everything after the yield statement is only evaluated during the next call.

```
>>> fib = fibonacci_sequence()
>>> next(fib)
Pre Loop
Before Yield: 1
0
>>> next(fib)
After Yield: 1
Before Yield: 2
1
>>> next(fib)
After Yield: 2
Before Yield: 3
1
>>> next(fib)
After Yield: 3
Before Yield: 4
2
```

It is probably best to use generators as an iterator to run until completion
instead of representing some external states. This is also recommended in
the [Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/faq/design.html?highlight=generators#why-don-t-generators-support-the-with-statement).

## Underneath the hood

The generator goes through four states. It will start in `GEN_CREATED` and eventually terminate in `GEN_CLOSED`.

The interpreter suspends execution after every yield. Calling `next` on
the generator will resume execution again. Each RUNNING state will either
terminate in a yield or `StopIteration` if the function completes.

For example, in this simple countdown generator:

{% highlight python %}
def countdown(n):
  i = 0
  while n - i > 0:
    print(f"Before yield: {i}")
    yield (n-i)
    print(f"After yield: {i}")
    i = i + 1
{% endhighlight %}

The first 3 `next` calls yield the countdown, and the final `next` call raises
the `StopIteration` exception indicating the generator is now in a `GEN_CLOSED`
state.

```
>>> c = countdown(3)
>>> next(c)
Before yield: 0
3
>>> next(c)
After yield: 0
Before yield: 1
2
>>> next(c)
After yield: 1
Before yield: 2
1
>>> next(c)
After yield: 2
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
StopIteration
```
